[decisions] reference counting (#4676)
ElektraInitiative/libelektra: doc/decisions/1_in_discussion/reference_counting.md

# Reference Counting

## Problem

Elektra's data structures are shared between multiple owners.
A `Key` can be owned by many different `KeySet`s.

> Both `Key` and `KeySet` can be used in bindings.
> If the languages of those bindings have automatic memory management, this also implies a shared ownership.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both `Key` and `KeySet` are used in bindings, often also implying shared ownership.
```

> To solve this issue of shared ownership, we need reference counting.

Reviewer: This is AFAIK already solved in the current API. See also https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/libelektra/pull/4805#discussion_r1083989993

Author: See https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/libelektra/pull/4676#discussion_r1088275260

> An adjacent problem is that the names of `Key`s must be read-only while the `Key` is part of a `KeySet`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An adjacent problem is that the names of `Key`s must be read-only while the `Key` is part of ordered data structures like the `KeySet`.
```

> This can also be solved by a secondary counter just for `KeySet`s.

Author: Ignore these two sentences about read-only names. I don't know why I added them. It doesn't really come up in the rest of the file. It's mentioned briefly in the "Decision" and "Rationale" section but never really explained. I think I just copied that from the old decision.

**This PR** is supposed to be about the general reference counting used by `Key` & `KeySet`, currently done via `inc`/`dec`(/`del`).

For the read-only names, I'll create a separate decision. It's much simpler for that case, because a re-entrant lock is clearly the only solution.

> This can also be solved by a secondary counter just for `KeySet`s.

Reviewer: > This PR is supposed to be about the general reference counting used by Key & KeySet, currently done via inc/dec(/del).

We already have reference counting, so the decision must be about what is wrong in what we have now.

> This can also be solved by a secondary counter just for `KeySet`s.

Author: As noted in https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/libelektra/pull/4805#discussion_r1085399408, this I introduced this decision as a means to re-examine the current refcounting implementation and to explore the different options, since there was no documentation on why the current solution was chosen.

As always "rejecting" the decision is an option. Although in this case for documentation purposes, I would actually still move the decision to "implemented" and just choose the current solution as the "Decision".

So in short: I'm not saying there is necessarily a problem with the current implementation. All I want is that _we_ (not just myself) think about whether another option could be better, _without_ always falling back to "we already have an implementation". I have absolutely no issue, if we decide "the current implementation is good enough" or "another option is better, but not so much that the effort of changing it is worth it". However, before we make that decision, we _have to_ discuss all options equally.

> There has also been [discussion](copy_on_write.md) about adding further data structures, which would need reference counters as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There has also been [discussion](../1_in_discussion/copy_on_write.md) about adding further data structures, which would need reference counters as well.
```

Can we refer to other decisions with the directory they are in? This makes it **much** easier to move individual decisions, as updating links is just a single find/replace for `old_folder/decision_name.md` with `new_folder/decision_name.md".

Author: Good point, @markus2330 should add that to #4639 as well: "Links to decision should always contain the directory of the decision, even if the link is from another decision in the same directory."

Reviewer: Good idea, I added d94ff201d0d6826e4a3d277fcd26c21ad8ecb792

## Constraints

> - Deleting data structures that still have references must be prevented

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Deleting (parts of) data structures that still have references must be prevented. (Valgrind must not detect any problems.)
```

Author: I don't like the Valgrind part... Yes, it's a simple test, but if someone finds an issue that is not detected by valgrind, that's still a problem.

Reviewer: Valgrind will detect any problem if there is a test case for this situation. I updated:

```suggestion
- Deleting (parts of) data structures that still have references must be prevented. (Valgrind must not detect any problems for any test case.)
```

Author: Still don't like it. I wasn't suggesting that valgrind might miss a memory problem (although that is possible too, e.g. when `mmap` is used). I was talking about exactly the case that no test case exists. So I suggest

```suggestion
- Deleting (parts of) data structures that still have references must be prevented. This includes, but is not limited to, running all (compatible) tests via `valgrind` without issues.
```

My issue was that just adding the `valgrind` part made it sound like just running `valgrind` without problems would be enough to fulfil the constraint. If you really want to mention `valgrind`, we need to clarify that the constraint goes beyond that.

Reviewer: Please simply change the underlying file(s).

- The APIs for `ksAppendKey` and `ksNew` must remain ergonomic.

>   The reference counting must not prevent the inline creation of a `Key` while adding it to a `KeySet`.

Reviewer: Better move this to assumptions for now (as long as we don't have use cases).

Author: What do you mean with "as long as we don't have use cases"?

```c
keyAppendKey (ks, keyNew ("/foo", KEY_END));
ksNew (1, keyNew ("/foo", KEY_END), KS_END);
```

That's what I'm talking about. A very real use case and integral part of the current API. The API might change, so maybe we remove the specific references to the functions, but I think we all agree that we want to keep this option. The alternative would be something far more verbose like (placeholder API):

```c
Key * k  = keyNew ("/foo", KEY_END);
keyAppendKey (ks, k);
keyDel (k);

Key * k1  = keyNew ("/foo", KEY_END);
ksNew (1, k1, KS_END);
keyDel (k);
```

I also don't know how this could be phrased as an assumption.

Reviewer: The question is if we want to support the use case to be able to construct any keyset with a single function call. (Looking at our API we probably want, but we don't have documented use cases for that.)

Author: Still, either we leave it as a constraint or remove it completely. It doesn't make sense as an assumption. IMO assumptions are statements that simplify the problem space. This is exactly the opposite. It would be stupid of us to assume something that makes our lives more difficult.

Reviewer: Ok, I agree, let us keep it as constraint. We cannot write use cases for every detail.

## Assumptions

- The reference counter doesn't need to be thread-safe.
- A reference counter of size `uint16_t` is large enough for all use cases.

>   Further restricting the counter by a small amount to allow for error value is also acceptable.

Reviewer: The current C++ binding increments the reference counter for usage of `Key` in blocks. So in the case of recursion, `uint16_t` might not be enough.

I agree that we should assume some fixed size to be enough, maybe even `uint16_t` (and fix the C++ Binding).

Reviewer 2: I mean we could go all the way and just use `size_t`, then it's physically impossible to have more than that.

Author: > The current C++ binding increments the reference counter for usage of Key in blocks. So in the case of recursion, `uint16_t` might not be enough.

Do you mean something like this:

```cpp
void foo(Key k, int depth) {
   if (depth > 0) {
      foo(k);
   }
}
```

Because that can be solved without even touching the binding (I think):

```cpp
void foo(Key & k, int depth) {
   if (depth > 0) {
      foo(k);
   }
}
```

In any case, IMO assuming `uint16_t` for now is fine. We can always change it to e.g. `uint32_t` without much trouble.

Author: > I mean we could go all the way and just use `size_t`, then it's physically impossible to have more than that.

I think `uint32_t` should be more than enough. I wouldn't go to `size_t`, because that is also the maximum alignment. So having a `size_t refs` and e.g. `int flags` in the same struct has more padding than with `uint32_t refs` or `uint16_t refs`.

Reviewer: > Do you mean something like this:

Yes.

> Because that can be solved without even touching the binding (I think):

People might use call by value `Key` and still expect this to work. Call by value is now much more popular due to move semantics.

> I think uint32_t should be more than enough

Having fixed-size types has the advantages:

- same behavior on all systems
- mmap files are more likely to be compatible

But then we need to document how big arrays etc. can be. Maybe even its own little decision.

Author: > due to move semantics

A move constructor shouldn't change the refcount, because it just _moves_ the reference. If it's not certain that a move constructor would be used, then (especially for a deeply recursive function) pass-by-value should not be used for stack size reasons alone.

However, I've already said that we can discuss a larger refcount in future. But the size of the field has basically no impact on the decision. We should not discuss it now. All I wanted to say with the assumption (and maybe I'll rephrase it) is that (1) `uint16_t` is the absolute minimum and (2) for most or even all cases, it also good enough.

Reviewer: > However, I've already said that we can discuss a larger refcount in future.

I don't think there is any sensible way to change anything in refcounting after 1.0.

Author: Well, if there is no `keyGetRefCount()` function then I don't see an issue. Changing the type of the refcount would be a purely internal change with no affect on the API. It would still change behaviour, so the question is how strict we want to be, but I'd argue it would just be a minor `x.1.0` change and not a major breaking change.

If there is a `keyGetRefCount()` then changing the return type would be a breaking change. But we could technically do a hacky solution like:

```c
uint16_t keyGetRefCount(Key * key) {
    if (key->refcount > UINT16_MAX) return UINT16_MAX;
    return key->refcount;
}

uint32_t keyGetRefCountLarge(Key * key) {
    return key->refcount;
}
```

All this is to say: For the IMO _highly unlikely_ case that `uint16_t` turns out to be too small, there are ways to go forward. So IMHO using `uint16_t` is fine. If it is possible without increasing the struct sizes, we could also use `uint32_t`. But I really wouldn't sacrifices extra bytes for every `struct _Key`, just of the hypothetical case where `uint16_t` isn't enough.

Crucially, the pointer returned to the caller still points after the header data, which is therefore hidden.

Since (almost) all allocations for Elektra's data structures go through `elektraMalloc`, we could implement something similar.
In `elektraMalloc` we allocate a few extra bytes (for alignment reasons this would be `sizeof(size_t)`) and use them for reference counting.
The reference counting would be done via generic `elektraRetain` and `elektraRelease` functions.
These functions increment and decrement the counter in the hidden header.
Additionally, `elektraRelease` would also call `free` when the count reaches zero.

Like in the "Retain/Release/Free" option above, the hidden header data could also be used to store a pointer to a `free` function.
Then things like `mmapstorage` could be covered as well.

```c
// Based on: https://codereview.stackexchange.com/questions/146561/reference-counting-in-c99

// Note: should NOT call free() on pointer
typedef void (*Destructor)(const void*);

typedef struct {
  Destructor destroy;
  unsigned int count;
} ObjectRecord;

> static ObjectRecord *toRecord(void *object) { return (ObjectRecord*)(object) - 1; }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
static ObjectRecord *objectToRecord(void *object) { return (ObjectRecord*)(object) - 1; }
```

Reviewer 2: Wait ... is this really `object - 1`? Shouldn't it be `object - sizeof(ObjectRecord)`?

Author: Yes, it works because of the parentheses. `(ObjectRecord*)(object - 1)` would be wrong, but by casting first and then subtracting the pointer arithmetic is done in terms of `sizeof(ObjectRecord)`. One of the weird and wonderful properties of C. See also the first answer of the StackExchange link a few lines above.

> static void *fromRecord(ObjectRecord *record) { return record + 1; }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
static void *recordToObject(ObjectRecord *record) { return record + 1; }
```

Author: I'm gonna ignore those name change suggestions because these are just placeholders anyway. Some are even just copied from the sources.

Reviewer 2: That's up to you, but in the code below you use the other names. Would make it a bit more clear if they are consistent.

Author: Oh in that case, I'll change it

> void * elektraMalloc(size_t size, ) {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
void * elektraMalloc(size_t size) {
```

> void * elektraMalloc(size_t size, ) {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
void * elektraMalloc(size_t size, Destructor destroy) {
```

  ObjectRecord *record = malloc (sizeof (ObjectRecord) + size);
  if (record == NULL) {
    return NULL;
  }
  record->count = 1;

>   record->destroy = destroy;

Reviewer 2: Where is `destroy` coming from?

Reviewer 2: Oh that's probably the missing parameter above

Author: > Oh that's probably the missing parameter above

Yup

  return recordToObject (record);
}

unsigned int elektraRefCount(const void * p) {
  return objectToRecord (p)->count;
}

void elektraRetain(const void *p)
{
    ++objectToRecord(p)->count;
}

void elektraRelease(const void *p)
{
    ObjectRecord *record = objectToRecord(p);

    record->count--;
    if (record->count > 0) {
        /* still referenced */
        return;
    }

    if (record->destory) {
        record->destory(p);
    }
    free(record);
}
```

Usage example:

```c
static void ksDestroy(const void * p) {
  KeySet * ks = (KeySet *)p;
  for (size_t i = 0; i < ks->size; i++) {
    elektraRelease(key);
  }
  // [...]
}

KeySet * ksCreate() {
  KeySet * ks = elektraMalloc(sizeof(struct KeySet), ksDestroy);
  // [...] initalization
  return ks;
}

void ksAppendKey(KeySet * ks, Key * key) {
  elektraRetain(key);
  // [...]
}

// for compatibility and for complete API
static inline void ksDel(KeySet * ks) {
  elektraRelease(ks);
}
```

## Decision

General decisions regardless of implementation:

- `Key` has two counters.

>   One that blocks deletion, another to prevent name changes.

Author: No it hasn't yet. But it was already decided that we'll use a second counter with this exact "reentrant lock" idea to automatically lock/unlock the key when it is/isn't in a KeySet. In that case, I don't think there are many alternatives, since it is the prime example use case for a reentrant lock.

>   One that blocks deletion, another to prevent name changes.

Reviewer: We talked talked past each other when we discussed this. I never thought of the second ref counter as good idea but argued that we should try to simplify the problem (e.g. stay read-only, stay locked etc.)

>   One that blocks deletion, another to prevent name changes.

Author: Oh okay, you should've been more clear on that.... The old decision was already in "Partially implemented" and had "add second counter to Key" in the "Decision" section.

I don't think this is the right place to discuss it. Since this PR is not at all about the locking of keynames. (I will remove this note about two counters). The keyname locking stuff should be discussed in the next PR for https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/libelektra/blob/master/doc/decisions/0_drafts/readonly_keynames.md

- Reference counts are of type `uint16_t`.

### Counted deletion lock

The reference counting consists of two functions `inc` and `dec`.
When a structure is created, its reference count is set to `0`.
Only in this state can the structure be deleted.
If the count is non-zero, deletion is no-op.
The `inc` and `dec` function increment and decrement this count.

Therefore, the reference counter can be considered a reentrant/counting lock, which blocks the deletion of a structure.
At zero the lock is unlocked, any calls to `inc` lock the lock one more time, and calls to `dec` unlock once.

The secondary counter for the name of a `Key` works the same way, but it blocks changes to the name.

Additional details:

- `inc` returns an error on reference count overflow
- `dec` does not return an error on underflow, instead the count stays at zero

## Rationale

- Adding a second reference counter to Key and reducing the size of both significantly (`size_t` to `uint16_t`)

>   actually saves memory (32 vs 64bit on 64-bit machines) compared to the previous solution.

Author: This is actually a left over bit from the old version of this decision. I'll probably split out the stuff about locking the key name into a separate decision. Maybe it'll end up in #4689. The second counter looks like our current ref counter, but it really has a completely different use case.

> it's not clear without implementation detail whether this really saves memory.

In the old version the decision stated that we go from one `size_t` to two `uint16_t` right next to each other in `struct _Key`. In that case it could save memory or stay the same, but it definitely wouldn't need more.
